[Music]
hello everybody and
welcome to this month's night sky news
for september 2020 with me
astrophysicist dr becky smith this is
the show
where we look ahead at what you can see
in the night sky in the coming months
and then also chat about what's happened
in space news
in the last month we've got chapter
titles if you want to skip ahead
to any particular point in any article
or image or video whatever i mention in
the video will also be linked
in the description below as well without
any further ado
let's start by looking up
all right so if you're new here you
won't know that my favorite thing to see
in the sky ever is what i call a toenail
moon or a crescent moon whatever you
want to call it
and this weekend from the 18th to 21st
september we're gonna have a beautiful
toenail moon in the west
just after sunset looking absolutely
gorgeous
then next week on the 24th and 25th of
september we've got the moon
pairing up with jupiter and saturn just
like we had last month
this is one of my favorite things that
can happen in the night sky that
something that's incredibly easy to spot
like the moon because it's so bright i
would hope that everybody
could probably at least attempt to find
the moon in the night sky
pairs up with something that's much
harder to spot
at least if you don't know what you're
looking for anyway so on the 24th the
moon is going to be very close to
jupiter in the sky which will be
essentially the brightest thing after
the moon so you
should be able to spot which sort of
thing that looks like a star but it's
actually a planet
is closest to the moon on that night and
then on the 25th the moon will be
closest
to saturn which will be a little bit
fainter than jupiter because it's
further away
and look a little bit yellowish the
jupiter and saturn are a beautiful pair
in the night sky at the minute and so if
you don't know what you're looking for
next week 24th and 25th this is a great
time
to look for them then from the 26th of
september onwards sort of into the first
week of october
mercury should be visible in the night
sky just
after sunset in the west now mercury is
a very difficult planet to spot because
it is so close to the sun so we only
ever see it
just before sunrise or just after sunset
when
the night sky is still pretty bright you
know the light from the sun sort of
glares
out any of that reflective light from
mercury so where you are on earth is
actually going to affect how easily
you're going to be able to see this
because it depends how high mercury is
going to be above the horizon from your
perspective if you're in the southern
hemisphere it's actually going to be
much easier for you because mercury
should be a lot higher in the sky
compared to say where i am in the uk
where mercury is actually pretty low on
the horizon so it's going to be very
difficult for me to pick out against the
glare
of the sun essentially the closer you
are to the equator in the northern
hemisphere the better chance
you've got and if you're in the southern
hemisphere you should have a very good
chance of spotting
mercury then on the second and third of
october we have another pairing of a
planet with the moon
this time mars which i know i mean it's
not my favorite planet saturn's my
favorite planet but i know it's a lot of
people's favorite planets so this is a
good one to look out for
if you've never been able to spot mars
in the sky before
has a sort of red dish sort of tint to
it
so on the second third find the moon and
then you should be able to find mars
probably just below it now again this
depends where you are on
the planet the further north you are the
more mars will appear to swing
below the moon but if you are incredibly
lucky and you live sort of
right on the tip of south america then
you will actually see the moon
occult mars which essentially means the
moon will pass in front
of mars on the sky and you will see mars
disappear
and then reappear on the other side so
for example
santa cruz in argentina you will see
mars disappear
at 11 18 p.m on the second and reappear
at 12
18 a.m on the 3rd of october if you
do live in that area and you want to
find the exact times
for your location there will be a link
in the description where you can put
that in
and find the exact times all right
that's enough for
looking up let's come back down to earth
and chat about all of the space news
that's been happening
in the past month
so on the 22nd of august we recorded the
closest an asteroid has ever
sort of flown past earth before at least
that we
know of it was an asteroid about the
size of a small
car and it came within 1380
miles but somewhere over the indian
ocean which to put that into context
is about 22 times the height that a
plane
flies so it was pretty damn close and
this is what obviously
those people with a little bit of
anxiety but for me i'm like well
at least we're spotting the little
things you know
like at least we found the small things
that if they did impact with earth you
know would
barely have any impact you know people
would probably not notice the wheelie
bins
outside might fall over you know that's
about
it whereas if we're spotting those
little things then we're obviously
spotting the big things as well we know
that
the asteroids sort of hunting missions
uh on earth with some telescopes here on
earth so the surveys and also
sort of those in space on the lookout as
well they're doing their job
and they're finding these things and we
can all sleep easy
now cast your minds back to july and if
you remember we had the beautiful
comet near-wise at gracing our sky and
if you were very lucky
you managed to snap a picture of it
whether that was on a phone
camera perhaps or maybe even something a
little bit
fancier we were all proud of the images
we got
it was even snapped from the
international space station as well by
astronauts
on board so i think a lot of people
around the world
managed to get what they considered was
a great shot of comet new wise but
we have all been put to shame this month
by the hubble space telescope's image of
comet near wise now you might be
thinking
becky this looks nothing like a comet
and that's because it's focused on only
the central part you know right in the
middle in the nucleus
which we call the coma this cone is
essentially made of the gas that's
escaping
from the comet so as the comet gets
closer to the sun a lot of the ice
in the comet melts it releases a lot of
the gas that's sort of trapped in
pockets in the rock and then that gas
sort of condenses
to form an atmosphere around it it's
then sort of the the solar wind or the
sort of radiation coming off the sun
that then hits that gas and sort of
sends it
streaming out in a tail away from the
sun
and that's what we sort of see as the
comet in the sky
there's a couple of things that this
hubble space telescope image shows first
of all it shows that the
nucleus of the comet is still intact
which is not always the case
after comets pass by the sun you know
all that melting ice and escaping gas
can actually cause comets to break apart
like we saw with comet atlas earlier
this year that people got
excited about thinking that that might
grace us guys turned out to be neowise
saving the day
in the end after atlas broke apart the
nucleus itself is actually too small to
see
in this image it's actually about 4.8
kilometers across
about three miles whereas the coma is
like 18 000 kilometers across about 11
000 miles and so what you're seeing is
actually that at least it's still
whole even though you can't see the
nucleus itself you can see that it's not
broken up into many pieces
like the hubble space telescope image of
comet atlas you can also see that the
gas and dust has a sort of
certain colour and the color reveals the
elements that make up the material
that's coming
off the comet which is very exciting
because that's material that's probably
been trapped since the very
early formation days of the solar system
and so by studying images like this we
can figure out conditions
in the early solar system so researchers
are studying this image
right now figuring out you know what are
they seeing and what is that telling us
about the solar system
so i'm sure when that paper comes out in
a couple of months maybe
you'll hear about it right here all
right so that was a nice pretty picture
you know just to get us
warmed up before we get into you know
whether the sun was born with a twin
or you know ligo's biggest black holes
it's ever detected
but as usual there was so much space to
use i had to pick stuff for this video
but the rest i'm going to talk about on
my instagram stories so if you want to
hear about
uh jupiter's four galilean moons and
how they might be heating themselves to
provide the right conditions for life
or if you want to hear about how rust
has formed on the moon despite there
being no oxygen on
the moon then head over there to my
instagram stories one of those will go
up tonight just as this video goes live
and one will go up over the weekend
if you're watching this video later
they're saved in a highlight on my
profile
as well so go check them out there but
anyway a paper that
massively caught my eye this month was
this one by siraj
and loeb from harvard now these two
authors are big supporters of the planet
nine theory that the solar system has a
ninth planet
no not pluto but another one
that's way out past the orbit of neptune
something like 400 to 800 times further
away from the sun
than earth is weighing in at around five
to ten ish times the mass of earth now
it's still a hypothetical planet though
because well it's never been observed
but if it existed it would nicely
explain to the strange clumping of
orbits of
the dwarf planets and asteroids that are
found out past
neptune there have even been some that
have suggested that the reason we
haven't found
planet nine yet is that it might be
a black hole about the size of a tennis
ball which
i am so on board for it's ridiculous
i want the solar system to have a pet
black hole now this planet nine
hypothesis
is very attractive because it does
explain a very few things about the
solar system that seem a little bit odd
and quirky
but one outstanding sort of question for
it is
how did this planet form out there like
how did a planet that
massive get to be at that distance
because everything we really see beyond
the orbit of neptune
is essentially just rubble right it's
it's planets that didn't really make it
that big
like poor pluto you know dwarf planets
as well it's little clumps of asteroids
it's just the leftover stuff
from the solar system now there's a
couple of ideas of how that planet could
have got
out there one of those being that it was
due to planetary migration
i could have formed further in towards
the sun
and then perhaps with say an interaction
with jupiter
it got flung out way out to the edge of
the solar system that's something that i
did a video on
uh last week on planetary immigration so
check that out if you're interested it's
all about how sort of saturn
held back the rains on jupiter so the
same thing didn't happen to earth and we
didn't end up either
flung out of the solar system or
somewhere out on
the edge the other idea for how the
planet got out there was that
it actually is sort of a captured rogue
planet
so if a planet that was forming around a
star
did get ejected through an interaction
with say something as massive as jupiter
and did get flung out into interstellar
space
and then you know on its random journey
through interstellar space it
encountered the sun's gravity and got
captured around
the sun now as you can imagine a random
planet
sort of wandering through interstellar
space being captured by the sun
is not that likely the planet has to be
on
just the right trajectory to be captured
into
an orbit rather than either being sort
of flung
into the sun or just sort of like what
um did in our own solar system where it
sort of
flung around the sun and was shot back
out again
and so it's one of those things that
everything has to be
just right for it to happen however
the probability of a planet being
captured like that
does go up if you have a binary system
of stars that's when you have two stars
orbiting each other so essentially the
gravity around those two stars
is always in flux it's always changing
and therefore you've got much more
chance of capturing anything that
happens to be on
a flyby because of that change in
gravity
so what siraj and lobe are suggesting is
that when the sun
formed it could have formed with
essentially a twin it could have been a
binary star in the very early days of
the solar system
which would have increased the
likelihood of capturing planet nine now
that idea
isn't as crazy as it initially might
sound because the sun is actually a bit
of a rarity in the milky way and the
fact that it is just a single star the
majority of stars in the milky way
actually are in
binary tertiary or more sort of star
systems
in fact 50 of sun like stars are thought
to be in either two
three or more systems so it's not
unlikely that in the very sort of dense
cloud of gas and
dust that the sun formed from it did
originally form
with a companion star that was perhaps
almost identical to it
this idea would also help explain the
oort cloud as well this is the sort of
spherical shell of icy rocky rubber way
out from the sun you know even beyond
what's considered the edge of the solar
system and sort of the sun's
little protective bubble of the
heliosphere we don't really know much
about it voyager 1 is scheduled to reach
it in about 300 years or so so perhaps
we'll know more about it
then but a companion to the sun could
explain all that rubble that we see in
the orc cloud
if that companion star formed in that
gap between
sort of the edge of the heliosphere and
the sun's influence and the edge
of the orchard now obviously
we don't see a companion star to the sun
there
today obviously
so what the authors suggest was that as
the sun and
it perhaps its little companion star
made their way out of the
nebula the gas and dust cloud that they
were born in
there was some interaction that
essentially ejected
that star out of the nebula and out of
the
binary system that the sun had found
itself in that ties in nicely with some
work done by adebekian and collaborators
back in 2018
who found a twin of the sun about 184
light years away so with that result
especially this idea that the sun was
born with a twin
doesn't seem that far-fetched
any more but you know if we wanted to
take it from
quirky hypothesis to accepted scientific
theory
then we'd actually need to go about
proving this some way and so what the
authors of the paper this month have
suggested was that if this actually was
the case and the sun was born with a
twin
we wouldn't just have planet nine we
would have this whole host
of captured planets out at roughly the
same distance that have been shepherded
there
by the sort of gravitational interaction
between the sun
and its twin now we obviously haven't
found planet nine yet it is very faint
because it is
at such a large distance you know
there's just such a large area of sky
that we could search in
for it makes it very difficult but if we
could find planet nine
and we also then found this whole host
of other objects at a similar distance
that would be
probably these captured rogue planets
then it would be very likely indeed that
once upon a time
the sun had a twin and finally the
result
that well it took the astrophysical
community by storm
this month and that was ligo's
announcement of its
biggest black hole merger ever
discovered with a remnant of 150 times
the mass of the sun so on may 21st
2019 ligo and virgo
both detected ripples in space time that
lasted just a tenth of a
second that were most likely from the
merger of two black
holes now after the first detection of
one of these ripples back in 2017 it
just seems like ligo is detecting these
ripples
just basically all the time right these
ripples that can be
best explained under einstein's theory
of general relativity
by the merger of two black holes and so
the fact that ligo has been detecting
more and more of these means we're
building up this big
population of them we can get really
good statistics
on them and understand them better so
what's so special about this one
was the biggest ever detected the two
black holes were 85 times the mass of
the sun
and 66 times the mass of the sun leaving
a remnant black hole about
142 ish times the mass
of the sun now the fact that it was 142
times the mass of sun the remnant that
we think has been left behind in this
merger
was the thing that got everybody very
excited because
at that mass it puts it in the very
elusive
category of intermediate mass
black holes so we have a lot of things
that we class as
stellar mass black holes these are
things that are
roughly the same masses of stars you
know sort of like three times
the mass of the sun and up and they form
in
supernova so when a star runs out of
fuel when it runs out of hydrogen gas
to burn in its core it goes supernova it
throws off
its outer layers into outer space and
the inner core
where all that sort of fusion of
hydrogen together to make helium was
happening that all collapses
down under its own gravity to give you a
black hole
it's sort of like tens of kilometers
across or so
and we see these all across the milky
way we see them either orbiting other
stars and so we sort of get little blips
as the black hole passes
in front of the star or we even see the
material that's sort of spiraling around
and getting eaten by the black hole that
material gets so hot that it goes
in x-rays and so we know that they're
there from observing the x-rays in the
milky way as well
then you've got super massive black
holes that we find in the center
of all galaxies across the universe
they're the things that i study in my
research and
i bloody love them and they can be
anywhere from tens of thousand times the
mass of sun
to tens of billions of times the mass of
the sun all in a
space that's about the size of the solar
system then you've got
in between super massive black holes and
stellar mass black holes
you've got this category of intermediate
mass black holes anywhere from sort of
a hundred times the mass is done up two
thousands of times
the mass of the sun but we've never
found
anything of that mass and so it's kind
of like the missing
link there's a mass gap between the sort
of everyday stellar mass black holes we
find and the super massive ones that we
find in the centers of galaxies
how did those supermassive black holes
get there did they grow from stellar
mass black holes in which case there
should be lots of intermediate mass
black holes everywhere
or did they form you know very early in
the early universe
as a sort of direct collapse black hole
from a cloud of gas that sent it you
know tens of thousands times the mass
the sun right from
the very beginning but sticking to topic
the big question for intermediate mass
black holes
is it just that they don't exist or you
know they're very rare or a common
or is it that they're just incredibly
hard to spot
so the ligo result is exciting for two
reasons first of all for showing that
okay
intermediate mass black holes can exist
at least under the right circumstances
where you have
these two other black holes merging
together to give you something that's an
intermediate
mass the second reason is because
the two black holes that merge together
in the first
place were also in something we call
a mass gap of the stellar mass black
holes
so especially the 85 times the mass of
someone but also the 66 times the mass
of someone to some extent
as well you would never expect to get a
black hole that
big from a normal star going supernova
as soon as you get up to stars that are
somewhere 130 times
the mass of the sun to sort of 250 times
the mass of sun we're doing like
really really massive stars here we
think they just skip
supernova all together and instead when
they run out of fuel they essentially
undergo this runaway
thermonuclear actual explosion
and blow the star apart completely and
don't leave any remnant behind at all
not even a black hole
so there's this theoretical upper limit
to how
massive of a black hole you can form in
a supernova when a star
dies and depending on what model you use
for how stars evolve
you get somewhere between sort of 45 to
60 times the mass of the sun for that
upper limit and yet here
we've got two black holes that merged
that were 85 times the master zone
and 66 times the mass of the sun so it's
very very exciting not only to get
something that was an intermediate mass
black hole
to end with but also to start with two
black holes that maybe
shouldn't exist but obviously clearly do
so one of the papers that came out from
the ligo and virgo teams this month
essentially went through all the
reasonable possibilities to explain
how these black holes got that massive
to start with and so one of the ideas
was that maybe you had a cluster of
stars and those sorts of massive stars
in that cluster they all went supernova
gave you normal-sized black holes which
then all merged together
in the cluster under gravity or perhaps
you had
runaway merger of primordial black holes
these tiny black holes that formed at
the beginning of the solar system and
that's how
we've ended up with these much larger
black holes than expected
or perhaps even the the merger wasn't of
two black holes that massive
and instead it was of black holes of
much smaller mass that were maybe on
much more elliptical
orbit like an oval-shaped orbit that
masqueraded as more massive black holes
on a
circular shaped orbit as always in
astrophysics i think it's more data
needed you know we need to observe
more of these mergers that give us these
intermediate mass black holes to really
understand them as a population as a
whole
and get more information from all of
them that will come in the future with
new gravitational wave detectors like
the ground-based einstein telescope or
the cosmic explorer or perhaps even the
space detector that's being built
lisa as well tomorrow
hey editing becky checking in here the
next day so i thought i was done filming
i thought i was completely done
editing this video as well and then
the royal astronomical society went and
announced that they detected
a molecule in the atmosphere of venus
that might be produced by
life yeah this is
big big news and
we have to chat about this okay so if
you had asked me
last week where was the most likely
place in the solar system that we would
find
possible signs of life my answer would
not have been
venus so this paper by greaves ital was
just announced by the royal astronomical
society and essentially what they found
is phosphine ph3 one molecule of
phosphate with three molecules of
hydrogen making a molecule in the
atmosphere
of venus well why is that exciting
phosphene gas what about it because
after going through
all the possibilities for how that
phosphine got there
the most likely hypothesis right now is
that it was made by
tiny microbes living in venus's
atmosphere so what they actually
detected was that when they split the
light
from venus into its component
wavelengths or
colours one colour that is generally
associated with phosphine
was missing essentially like the light
around that point instead of being
flat there was a big dip that
essentially said
phosphine is there absorbing that very
specific wavelength of light
and the wavelength that was spotted was
around about one millimeter or so it's
sort of
in the like infrared to sort of
microwave regime of the electromagnetic
spectrum now this was first spotted all
the way back in 2017
in data from the jcmt telescope on the
summit of mauna kea
in hawaii but that data wasn't the best
it was a little bit
noisy and although they were sure of the
detection it wasn't
enough to make a bold enough claim that
they wanted to
so they also then got in 2019
data using the alma array of telescopes
in the atacama desert in chile
and that gave much nicer data it wasn't
as noisy still obviously had some
noise in it but it meant that they could
be very
very confident of that detection of
phosphine in the atmosphere of venus
now since that detection back in 2017
especially since 2019 when that extra
detection confirmed what they'd
originally found
the astronomers have been trying to
think of
all the different processes they could
that were known of
that produce phosphine and then try and
rule them out if they could
now on earth there's two main ways that
phosphine is produced
the first is by humans in industry it
tends to be used in farming as a
pesticide
it's also used to construct
semiconductors you know sort of like
microchips that go in all electronics as
well
and then the second way is by microbes
specifically microbes that don't need
oxygen
to survive they tend to be found sort of
where organic matter is breaking down so
i've heard that they're found you know
on the bottom of ponds where's algae and
all that kind of stuff they're found in
penguin poo
as well and also in badger stomachs that
was a list i saw
what an array of places that we find
phosphenes there
and apparently venus now we're pretty
sure that industry and farming
is not happening on venus but there are
some other natural ways that phosphine
can produce
including volcanoes and geological
processes
lightning striking the atmosphere and
sort of acting as a catalyst
and then also sunlight also causing the
production of phosphine very similar to
how
sunlight causes the dissociation of an
o2 molecule on earth
and then that causes the production of
ozone o3
kind of a similar process to produce
phosphine possibly on
venus now what the astronomers did was
went through all those processes and
went through how much phosphine could
they realistically
make and would that be enough to explain
what we've
observed because from the amount of
absorption they saw you can then infer
okay how much phosphine is in the
atmosphere and they found it was about
20 parts per billion
of phosphine and venus's atmosphere and
all of those natural processes whether
geological
or something to do with sort of sunlight
none of those
could give you enough phosphine
to explain what they'd observed and so
having exhausted all of the options
the tentative conclusion which is still
a hypothesis
at the minute is that perhaps it's
microbes
living in the upper atmosphere of venus
so don't let any of the news headlines
sort of fool you over the next couple of
days this paper is
not claiming it has detected life in the
atmosphere of venus
it is claiming a detection of phosphine
and after going through all of the
possibilities
the most likely one at the minute is
that it could
be microbes but there is a long long way
to go yet before that hypothesis
turns into accepted theory and we start
teaching that there's
life on venus in schools and
universities
one question is actually how those
microbes are surviving in venus's
atmosphere
okay yeah they might be some of the
microbes that don't need oxygen
to survive but what about you know the
hostility of venus's atmosphere we know
that venus is the hottest place
in the solar system it's incredibly
acidic
as well but it's thought that at the top
of venus's cloud at least the cloud
layer
the pressure is very similar to earth's
atmospheric pressure
and the temperature is sort of a
comfortable 30 degrees
the only problem is that venus's clouds
are made of
90 sulfuric acid which is obviously
incredibly incredibly corrosive and so
that would still be a hostile
environment
for a microbe to live in and not be
dissolved
by acid so there's a lot of work still
to do not just for astronomers you know
to make more observations of venus
perhaps look for more of these
biosignatures that might sort of signal
if uh microbes do
exist but also for astrobiologists to
work out you know
how a microbe could actually survive in
such
conditions but also for the geologists
and the chemists to go back over well is
there other ways
that phosphine can be produced that we
haven't thought of yet that maybe we've
overlooked so i know people would like
to probably think that the detection of
life elsewhere in the universe will come
from
little green men or you know little
piano tunes close encounters of the
third kind style
[Music]
but in fact it will come from these bio
signatures because
if we're going to detect anything around
you know in an exoplanet around another
star
in our milky way then it's going to be
something like this we're going to
detect the absorption signature of a
molecule that's there that perhaps
we can only explain if that gas or
whatever it is was created by life and
not some geological process but to do
that we need to exhaust all these other
avenues that these
molecules and gases could be produced
by but that's probably going to be in
the future especially after the james
webb
space telescope launches but in the
meantime i think there's going to be a
flurry of new observations and results
about venus and maybe even we'll see you
know
instead of a load of missions going to
mars like we've seen in recent years we
might see
pivot and sort of being like okay let's
send a load to venus instead because
that's now the more interesting place
who knows now if you want to hear more
about this result
i'll actually be interviewing the lead
author on this paper professor jane
griez from cardiff university
for the royal astronomical societies
podcast that i co-host the super
massive podcast that will be out next
friday the 25th of september and there
is a link
in the description below so that you can
find it wherever you usually find
your podcasts all right is that it for
space news now because i need to chill
out and get this video
uploaded so you know universe no more
detections of life in the solar system
please at least
for the next three days now as always
with night sky news
we have covered a lot of topics in this
episode everything from
comets to the sun forming to black holes
and some of those you might not be
familiar with as others if that is the
case for you
then i have the perfect thing for you
because this week's video sponsor
is brilliant brilliant is a website with
courses on everything from science maths
to computer science that
help you to learn in a very interactive
and fun way most importantly just
engaging you
with the content so that you really
learn by doing
they have a treasure trove of astronomy
courses on brilliant from
understanding the night sky with the
movements of the stars and the planets
to the life cycles of stars as well so
this one would be particularly great to
take
if you're intrigued to learn more about
the formation of black holes
after our chat about how black holes
form
in supernova to give us the stellar mass
black holes that we see through the
milky way
if that sounds like something that you
would be up for then head to
brilliant.org forward slash dr becky
that's d-r-b-e-c-k-y or click
on the link in the description below the
first 200 people that go to that link as
well
will also get 20 off an annual premium
subscription
if you hedge that link you are actively
supporting me
and my channel so a massive thank you
from me to you if you do that
and also a massive thank you to
brilliant2 for sponsoring
this video that's it for this month's
night sky news
i will be back next week with another
fun video on something to do
with space but until then
roll those bloopers hello everybody and
welcome
to this month's night sky news for
bubble i see a toenail moon rising
i see a flower zone right that's about 1
380 miles above the indian ocean
and to put that into contact context but
a companion to the sun could actually
explain the orcs
but a companion to the sun could
actually explain the oorts clouds oughts
clouds
sister sister never knew how much i
missed you
shoulder sister
son had a twin and now we miss june
and they form from supernova so when a
sun
what a sun